Council tax to rise while services cut, says LGA
1 hour ago
 From the section UK 981 comments
Share
Bin menImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Council leaders are warning of deep cuts to services despite nearly every local authority in England planning to raise council tax in 2017.
Increases of up to 4.99% are expected across the country, but libraries, bin collections and other services will still face funding gaps.
The Local Government Association says the cost of care for increasing numbers of elderly people is forcing up bills.
The government insists it is giving more money to councils.
The Department for Communities and Local Government said local authorities had been given a "historic" four-year settlement, giving them the certainty they needed to plan ahead, with almost £200bn available "to provide the services that local people want".
All councils in England can raise council tax by 1.99% in April without having a local referendum.
The 151 social care authorities can increase bills by an extra 3% as long as that money goes on social care.
The Local Government Association (LGA) says 147 of these have already agreed or are planning to raise the extra money. And three-quarters are set to introduce the maximum hike.
Some residents will see even higher rises, as council tax regulations say the cap is based on the average council tax across the area, rather than a maximum for each household.
However, the LGA says further cuts will still be needed as councils are being pushed "perilously close to the financial edge".
Warwickshire County Council leader Izzi Seccombe told the BBC: "To continue it is really looking like we're cutting into the bones of services that matter to people.
"It's not just social care. Things like roads, highways, bus services which are subsidised, libraries, access to leisure centres, waste services, children's services as well."
What's the deal with council tax increases?
Why will there be a 4.99% rise?
All local authorities in England can raise council tax by up to 1.99% in April. Any higher, and they would need to hold a referendum to get residents to agree with the hike before they could put it in place.
But the 151 social care authorities can also increase bills by an extra 3%. This is the social care precept, introduced by George Osborne in 2015 to allow local authorities to raise extra money to specifically pay for social care.
The Local Government Association (LGA) says 147 of these have already agreed or are planning to raise the extra money. And three-quarters are set to introduce the maximum hike.
Added together, this means most people in England will be looking at a 4.99% rise in council tax in the coming year.
Some people will pay more as the 4.99% cap only has to be the "average" rise across the area. So for Swindon Borough Council, for example, householders in some council tax bands will see a 3.12% rise whilst others will see a 7.28% rise - with the average staying within the rules.
Will this rise cover local services?
Many councils say no and their issue stems from a change in the way local services are funded.
